A doctor who had returned to New York City recently after treating Ebola patients in West Africa tested positive for the virus on Thursday, officials said, setting up a new front in the nation’s attempt to control the spread of the deadly disease.

Craig Spencer, a 33-year-old physician who had worked with Doctors Without Borders in Guinea until returning to the U.S. a week ago, is the fourth patient to be diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S. and the ninth to be treated here.

Dr. Spencer called the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene at about 11:52 a.m. to report that he had a fever and gastrointestinal problems, and had quarantined himself inside a fifth-floor apartment on West 147th Street in Manhattan, authorities said. A Fire Department of New York hazardous materials team put Dr. Spencer in an exposure suit and transported him to Bellevue Hospital Center, the official said.

He tested positive less than three weeks after Liberian Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed on U.S. soil, died on Oct. 8. The subsequent Ebola diagnoses of two nurses who treated Mr. Duncan raised concerns that the nation’s medical systems weren’t well-equipped to stop the spread of a virus that has killed nearly 4,900 people.

Health officials say a doctor who recently returned to New York City after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. Package: AP
Ebola is a highly contagious virus, but only if you come into contact with certain bodily fluids of those infected. What do scientists know about how it's transmitted? WSJ’s Jason Bellini has #TheShortAnswer.
In New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio said authorities had been preparing for an Ebola case for weeks and followed new protocols “very precisely.” Bellevue is one of eight hospitals that New York state officials have designated to handle suspected cases of Ebola.

“There is no reason for New Yorkers to be alarmed,” Mr. de Blasio said at a news conference at the hospital Thursday night. “We have clear and strong protocols which are being scrupulously followed.”

Mr. de Blasio said Dr. Spencer was “in good shape” and able to discuss his condition and with whom he came into contact. Detectives were tracing Dr. Spencer’s contacts to determine whether anyone else is at risk of becoming ill, city officials said. Detectives were using Dr. Spencer’s credit card and MetroCard and interviewing his contacts to determine whether anyone else is at risk of becoming ill, city officials said.

Dr. Spencer had come into close contact with only four people since he returned from Africa on Oct. 17 through John F. Kennedy International Airport, authorities said. All four—two friends, a cabdriver and his fiancée—are healthy, officials said.

Dr. Spencer hadn’t been back to his job as a staff physician at New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center since his return from Africa and hadn’t seen any patients, the hospital said. “He limited his contact with people,” said Mary Travis Bassett, the New York City health commissioner, though she noted he occasionally went out during the past week.

On Wednesday night, he rode three different subway lines, going bowling at a Brooklyn alley called the Gutter and summoning a cab through the e-hailing app, Uber, Dr. Bassett said. That day he went for a three-mile run, walked through the High Line park and ate at a Manhattan restaurant called the Meatball Shop, city officials said.

Authorities stressed that Dr. Spencer appeared in fine health until Thursday morning. He left Guinea on Oct. 14 and flew to Europe, where he stayed for three days before flying out of Brussels, city officials said. On Oct. 17, he made it through multiple levels of screening at Kennedy Airport and showed no signs of illness, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Thursday night.

Dr. Bassett said Dr. Spencer knew he was at risk for Ebola and took his temperature twice a day. He didn’t begin to feel ill until Thursday morning between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m., she said, when he experienced a high fever. He contacted authorities who rushed him to the hospital.

Dr. Spencer was being treated with fluids—standard treatment for Ebola virus—and “he’s lucid and communicating,” said a city official.

The CDC deployed a team of experts to New York City Thursday before test results came in, signaling its level of concern about Dr. Spencer’s case. The agency has received more than 400 reports of possible Ebola cases during the past several weeks, and deployed only once previously: to Dallas, where Mr. Duncan was a patient at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas.

ENLARGE
Doctors Without Borders confirmed that one of its workers in West Africa recently had been hospitalized in New York but offered no details. The organization trains its staff rigorously and has a strong record of safety in its Ebola treatment units. But at least two other workers have been infected during the course of this epidemic, a testament to the challenges faced as cases mount in crowded wards. While Dr. Spencer had been out and around the city since his return from Guinea, pPublic-health officials say the risk that Dr. Spencer infected anyone is low. Ebola is known to spread only through contact with bodily fluids, such as blood, vomit, and diarrhea.

The epidemic has taken a heavy toll on health workers overall, many of whom died in the early months because they lacked protective gear. According to the World Health Organization, 443 health workers have been infected during the outbreak, of whom 244 have died.

Overall, at least 9,936 people have been infected with Ebola due to the West African outbreak, according to the World Health Organization.

Dr. Spencer’s apartment in a diverse, immigrant neighborhood in upper Manhattan was sealed off pending diagnosis, law-enforcement officials said. City Health Department workers were outside the six-story, 36-unit building Thursday, handing out Ebola information brochures and reassuring residents.

“We’re just reminding people that we’re on top of it and that they’re safe,” said Sam Miller, an associate city health commissioner at the scene. “We’re telling them the facts,” he added, noting that Ebola can’t be spread by air or in water.

The area’s city councilman, Mark Levine, turned up and urged residents to remain calm. “There’s no cause for panic here,” he said.

In addition, Ebola patients tend not to be very infectious when they first become ill and are having only mild symptoms. Levels of virus increase as the disease progresses and a patient’s condition worsens; those near death or recently deceased are most infectious.

Mr. Duncan was ill for several days in a small apartment, but didn’t infect anyone living in close quarters with him there. The two nurses who did become infected treated him when he already was severely ill and having copious amount of vomit and diarrhea, officials said.

New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the state’s hospitals had been preparing for this for weeks. “We had the advantage of learning from the Dallas experience,” the governor said.

Of the eight people previously treated for Ebola in the U.S. seven, including five evacuated from Africa, have been treated in special biocontainment units built to handle patients with serious infectious diseases, with staff specially trained in use of protective gear.

Dr. Spencer’s situation is the latest scare related to the deadly disease in the past two weeks in the Greater New York area, where two of the nation’s five airports receiving passengers from Ebola-affected countries are located. A passenger stopped at Newark Liberty International Airport with fever tested negative for the disease, and a Yale University student returning from Liberia was hospitalized with Ebola-like symptoms last week before testing negative.

President Barack Obama on Thursday night talked to Messrs. Cuomo and de Blasio in separate phone calls about the diagnosis of the Ebola case in New York City, the White House said.

Mr. Obama noted the extensive preparations that the city and in particular Bellevue Hospital Center had taken for Ebola and offered additional federal support.

— Joe Jackson, Pervaiz Shallwani and Colleen Wilson contributed to this article.

Write to Betsy McKay at betsy.mckay@wsj.com