SAN FRANCISCO—The most closely guarded assets at AT&T Park are hidden just behind the center-field wall. A massive overhead net shields them from falling baseballs, and a group of minders keeps eager fans from getting too close.

They are the stars of the San Francisco Giants’ farm system: radicchio, cilantro, sorrel and kale. And don’t overlook the tarragon, Swiss chard, lemon grass and sage.

Just steps from the field where the World Series will resume with Game 3 on Friday night, more than two dozen vegetables, herbs and fruits are growing in the Giants’ new garden. Though fans aren’t allowed to pick them, the greens are used in an assortment of dishes on sale within this earthy enclave.

Among the homegrown offerings: a kale and spinach salad with roasted orange peppers, baby artichoke hearts, shaved radishes and sunflower seeds for $11.50 and a $6.50 blueberry and chocolate mint smoothie.

The garden—one of the first of its kind at an American sports stadium—comes as a bizarre sight to some fans who associate stadiums with more traditional fare. “I go for peanuts and hot dogs,” says Jeff Heppermann, 55 years old, during last week’s National League Championship Series.

But the Giants say that the Garden, as they call it, promotes healthy eating. In a city with no shortage of fussy foodies, it has attracted its share of devotees.

“It’s perfect for San Francisco,” says Giants season-ticket holder Wells Richter, 72 years old, of Los Altos, Calif. “We’re conscientious, green-head liberals.”

The idea for the garden took root during a 2012 dinner conversation between Giants Chief Executive Larry Baer and his wife, Pam; Giants outfielder Hunter Pence, the team’s healthy-eating ambassador; and Fedele Bauccio, chief executive of Bon Appetit Management Co., the Giants’ foodservice partner.

Sandwiched between the left-field and right-field stands, the 4,320-square-foot garden feels at once connected to and removed from the rest of the ballpark.

The garden may be an almost utopian oasis of tranquility, with its rows of lushly packed planter beds and water-conserving, vertical garden towers. But it is also a popular vantage point—complete with a bar, tables, seating and concession stands. Fans who want to stay planted inside the garden can still watch the game action through a series of cutouts in the center-field wall or follow it on one of several big-screen televisions.

When the St. Louis Cardinals took an early 1-0 lead over San Francisco during Game 4 of the NLCS last week, the rest of the ballpark let out a collective groan. Inside the garden, a sign above one of the concession stands signaled a different mood. Quoting the late author Lewis Grizzard, it reads: “It’s difficult to think anything but pleasant thoughts while eating a homegrown tomato.”

The Giants take vegetable security seriously, however. There are small signs every few feet in the planter beds that read: “EDIBLE GARDEN. PLEASE DO NOT TOUCH.” Throughout the game, several minders pace around the greenery, clad in orange shirts and black vests. They greet fans with smiles and cheerily explain which type of plant is which. But they are quick to admonish those who get a little too touchy-feely with the vegetables.

During the NLCS last week, a minder found one woman picking mint leaves to drop into her cocktail. Other fans were caught plucking strawberries from a plant. One man made the mistake of putting his hot dog plate on a ledge beside an oregano patch. A minder immediately asked him to remove it, saying, “It can accidentally fall in.”

Baseballs have been another hazard. The team initially put a small, protective net over the plants closest to the outfield wall. But in early July, just a couple of weeks after the garden opened, Mr. Pence hit a home run that smashed a piece of kale. Several batting-practice home runs also cleared the net, striking deep into the botanical heart of the ballpark.

Now, the net extends over the entire garden. “We have to protect the vegetables,” says Mr. Baer.

AT&T Park isn’t the first stadium to grow its own produce. John Thorn, Major League Baseball’s official historian, says the first known ballpark vegetable patch took root at Shea Stadium, the since-demolished home of the New York Mets, in 1969.

Joe Pignatano, who was then the Mets’ bullpen coach, noticed a tomato plant emerging from the dirt beyond the right-field fence and started tending to it. When the Mets won the World Series that year, he viewed the plant as a good-luck charm. The bullpen garden grew in subsequent years to include radishes, pumpkins, zucchini and bell peppers.

The Baltimore Orioles also grew tomatoes in foul territory in left field at the old Memorial Stadium from 1970 until 1991. They were the pet project of groundskeeper Pasquale Santarone, and a source of banter with legendary manager and rival tomato-grower Earl Weaver. Mr. Weaver once told the Baltimore Sun that Mr. Santarone’s vegetables were “nothing more than scrub tomatoes…all pulpy inside.” (Both men are deceased.)

More recently, teams have opened gardens to create produce for concession food. The San Diego Padres opened one at Petco Park in 2012. The Colorado Rockies did the same at Coors Field in 2013. But neither of those gardens is as large as the one at AT&T Park.

When the Giants visited the White House in July 2013 to commemorate their 2012 World Series victory, team officials were asked to fill out a form detailing their community work.

Among other things, they mentioned that they were considering the idea of a vegetable garden. It was far from a definite plan, but when President Barack Obama spoke at a ceremony in the team’s honor, he broke the news to the public.

“The Giants are going to help encourage local youth to eat healthy—even at the ballpark,” the president said.

Recalling the president’s role earlier this week, Mr. Baer said, “It was percolating as a possibility, but then when the president announced it, it was like, ‘Well, now we have to do it.’ ”

None of the plants are seeded at AT&T Park. The Giants employ an outside gardener who begins growing them in nearby Colma, Calif., not far from the San Francisco airport. There, they continue to grow until they are a proper size to be moved to the park.

The Giants plan to use the space as an outdoor classroom to educate children about sustainability, urban farming and healthy eating—though some fans could use their own lesson.

After strolling through the garden last week, Max Heppermann, the 25-year-old son of Jeff Heppermann, came away inspired. He said he would choose a vegetarian dish that night.

“Garlic and fries,” he said. “Those are technically vegetables, right?”

Write to Brian Costa at brian.costa@wsj.com